# Stress-Induced Mucosal Layer Disruption Drives Gut Dysbiosis and Depressive-like Behaviors: Baseline vs. Stressed 16S rRNA Sequencing Analysis

## Project Summary
The following repository contains the data and code used for analysis of the intestinal microbiota in a mouse model of chronic stress. This data is based off of a pilot proposal from the University of Virginia Trans-University Microbiome Initiative and has been submitted for publication in Nature Communications. Mice (n = 24 per group) were treated with chronic mild stress for 3 weeks. Stool samples were collected both at baseline and after stress treatment for analysis of changes in microbiota diversity and community composition. This analysis found significant differences in beta diversity and community composition after stress treatment, and a random forest model clearly distinguished between groups based on these data.


## Abstract
Depression is a common mental health condition with a large social and economic impact. While depression etiology is multifactorial, chronic stress is a well-accepted contributor to disease onset. In addition, depression is associated with altered gut microbial signatures that can be replicated in animal models. While targeted restoration of the microbiome has been shown to reduce depressive-like behaviors in mice, the complexity and diversity of the human microbiome has complicated therapeutic intervention in patients. To circumvent these limitations, there is a critical need for identifying pathways responsible for microbiome dysbiosis. Here, for the first time, we identify the changes in host physiology that induce microbiome dysbiosis. Specifically, we show that a component of mucosal layer, the transmembrane protein mucin 13, can regulate microbiome composition. Using a model of chronic stress to induce behavioral and microbial changes in mice, we show a significant reduction in mucin 13 expression across the intestines that occurs independently of the microbiome. Furthermore, deleting Muc13 leads to gut dysbiosis, and baseline behavioral changes normally observed after stress exposure. Together, these results validate the hypothesis that mucosal layer disruption is an initiating event in stress-induced dysbiosis and offer mucin 13 as a potential new therapeutic target for microbiome dysbiosis in stress-induced depression. For the first time, our data provide an upstream and conserved target for treating microbiome dysbiosis, a result with sweeping implications for diseases presenting with microbial alterations.


## Accessing this Repository
All data and source code from this repository can be downloaded by cloning the git repository:
```
git clone https://github.com/gbmoreau/Gautier-manuscript.git
```
Alternatively, you can download a [zip archive of this repository](https://github.com/gbmoreau/Gautier-manuscript/archive/refs/heads/main.zip
). 


## Software Implementation
All source code for this analysis is stored in the `src` directory. Raw data and sample metadata used for this analysis are stored in the `data` directory. Results generated by this code are stored in the `results` directory.

## Dependencies
Before getting started with this analysis, you'll need to download the raw FASTQ files for 16S rRNA sequencing, which can be found at NCBI Bioproject under Accession number PRJNA867333. You will also need the reference database files used to assign taxonomy during the DADA2 pipeline. These files were obtained from the DADA2 website, and the version numbers for the specific Sivla reference databases are included in the DADA2 pipeline code file.

The specific R packages used for each analysis are located at the top of each individual code file. A comprehensive list of the packages used for this analysis as well as their release versions are listed below.

* BiocManager (Version 1.30.16)
* tidyverse (Version 1.3.1)
* dada2 (Version 1.22.0)
* phyloseq (Version 1.38.0)
* microbiome (Version 1.16.0)
* vegan (Version 2.6.2)
* caret (Version 6.0.90)
* randomForest (Version 4.6.14)
* pROC (Version 1.18.0)
* ggplot2 (Version 3.3.5)


## Setup
For setup of the initial analysis, follow these intial steps:

1. Download the raw FASTQ files for the 16S rRNA seqencing and place them in a `raw_reads` directory. This directory should be inside the `data` directory.
2. Download the reference database files for taxonomy assignment and place them in the `data` directory.
3. Run the "DADA2 Pipeline for Second Run of Gautier 16S Samples.R" code file. This will generate the "DADA2 Environment.RData" and "phyloseq object for analysis.RData" files, which are required for downstream analysis. You are now ready to perform all subsequent analyses with this data.

Most steps of the analysis pipeline performed quickly (instantaneously or <1 min) on standard hardware. Some steps of the DADA2 pipeline took slightly longer, but still performed within 10-15 minutes on standard hardware.


## Contact Information

G. Brett Moreau - gbm5pn@virginia.edu

